Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
After LeRoy Schoenemann graduated from Snook High School in 1941, he wanted more out of life, and it was those sounds and sights of aircraft over his head that inspired him to be a flyer.
He entered the Army Air Corps and was fast-tracked to the war in the Pacific.
First stop Guadalcanal as a member of the 64th Troop Carrier Squadron, piloting C-47s just about everywhere and carrying just about everything.
He eventually went to C-47s, from C-47s to B-47s, and that was quite a leap.
After World War II, he was reactivated and spent most of the Korean War at a lonely outpost in Libya.
It's a fascinating story, and we welcome Lieutenant Colonel LeRoy Schoenemann to Veterans of the Valley.
Welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
LeRoy, I want to get you over to the Pacific here, and you were pretty much fast-tracked after Pearl Harbor.
I think you went to San Antonio and you went around different places for training, but it wasn't long before you were sent to the Pacific, to Guadalcanal.
Sort of talk about that.
Were you ready to move that fast?
No, I didn't know what was going to happen to us because after flying school, less than a month later, I was on a ship headed for the South Pacific.
Landed in New Guinea and
And finally, they flew us over to Guadalcanal at Henderson Field, and there's where I joined my 64 troop carry squadron.
Talk about that squadron and what its job was.
C-47s were haulers.
You all just hauled people.
You hauled things.
Anything that needed to be taken from one place to another, that's what you all did.
Yeah, we were so like a truck line.
Everything that they needed, we hauled from one island to another.
A lot of it was we would take an advanced party up forward, and then the others would get on a boat,
And by the time they got there on the boat, the advance party would sort of have things arranged and set up for them.
We did a lot of that stuff.
But we hauled everything you can imagine.
Anything that could get in the doors that's in there.
Characterize some of those missions for me because there were times, I'm sure, that you flew under good conditions, good weather, but most of them were not good weather because that part of that country, it rained quite a bit.
There was a lot of cloud cover, right?
Yeah, we flew through a lot of
I can't say thunderstorms, because in the tropics you don't have much lightning, but it was pouring rain lots of times.
And fortunately, most of the airfields were built right on the beaches, so that when you found the island, the beaches were open, there was no rain.
The rain was more up in the mountains, and so we could find the thing.
There was no navigational aids or anything like we have nowadays.
It was pretty much
pilots in sight.
Right.
You were your own navigator, pretty much.
We were our own navigators.
We had a few navigators in the squadron, but most flights were done without navigators.
Right.
Talk about specifically some of your missions.
I know that when it was raining, it was wet.
There was a lot of mud involved.
You got stuck in the mud.
Well, yeah.
That happened mostly in the Philippines.
Up until we got in the Philippines, most of the airfields were built for fighters and bombers, and we had to
long, good runways.
We got to the Philippines, they sent us out in little old pre-war strips, I guess.
Most of them were, a lot of them were mud and little gravel and some of them were no runway at all, just mowed down the jungle grass and we landed out there.
And during drop missions, it rained about twice a day and we got so much mud and water and with the doors off to drop the stuff that we got mud inside and out of the airplane.
where all you could about see is the nose of the airplane.
Yeah, when they land in that mud and water, the only thing you could see was the nose of the airplane.
But there's a good old airplane.
I don't think many of them could have took all that stuff.
Right, right.
A lot of the landing strips you talked about at Guadalcanal and other places were actually built by the Navy Seabees, right?
So these were pretty worthy airstrips, right?
Right, yeah.
They needed pretty good airstrips for B-24s and stuff like that.
There was one incident, I don't know when it was during this time, but where you actually did a 180 skid.
Tell us more about that one.
Well, that was another one of those muddy strips, and we were coming to the end of the strip, and we were still doing, I don't know, 40 miles an hour or something, and couldn't stop, so we did...
unlocked the tail wheel and gun one engine and that airplane did a 180 degree turn and sort of slid backwards before it stopped but we didn't run into anything.
We unloaded our stuff, all the army troops around there said, we want to see you do that again.
Only one time.
That's right, you only did that trick once.
And some of the trips, like you said, were quite short.
Sometimes you would have to take off as like 60 miles an hour.
And you can do that.
We call them carrier takeoff.
We run up full throttle and hold the brakes and then
When we got about 40 miles an hour, put down quarter flaps.
And I said, C-47, if you're very gentle with the controls, you could actually ease it off the ground at about 60 miles an hour.
And slowly gain enough speed to get climb speed.
When you got to Guadalcanal, you had never flown a C-47 before.
You sort of taught by observing, right?
Right.
And just like I say, OJT, flying with the other crews until we
Saw what was going on.
And then just sort of figured it out.
How big were the crews that you normally flew with?
They only had pilot and co-pilot.
They were crew chiefs and a radio operator.
You hauled tents.
You hauled jeeps.
You hauled... And you also did medevac.
Is that right?
Right.
In the Philippines, we did a lot of medevac.
A lot of medevac.
In other words, taking...
taking troops injured troops out till they could be transferred to hospitals is that right well we went I think they had these little hospitals at these little strips and we brought them more to the the main hospitals and Philippines
the army was scattered out more to all the islands where in the other ones they would take a perimeter or they would take an island and then they would move on.
But in the Philippines, of course there were thousands of islands out there and I think it covered all of them.
I don't think people sometimes get a really good grip of the span of time, the short span of time, especially for you from when you were just a kid on the farm in Chinook, Texas.
to flying a troop transport plane, a C-47, in World War II.
What were your thoughts then?
Because you were still a young, young man, and you had quite a responsibility.
I don't know that we even thought about that.
They told us what to do, and we went and did it, and we liked to do it.
Like I say,
I look back on it and I can't remember any time when you were fearful or anything like that, you know.
So were you scared?
Were you scared?
Were there ever any times that you thought, oh, this is going to be a pretty tight pit here?
I've been in some of them rainstorms when I thought, I hope we get through this thing, you know, pretty soon.
And usually 30 minutes or so you break out.
Right.
I've had World War II pilots tell me that
The order of concern that they have is third would be the enemy, second would be a mechanical problem, but their biggest concern was weather because that was so unpredictable.
Is that?
Yeah, I'd say the weather was, but I don't remember being
too fearful.
I guess being young, you don't worry about too much of that stuff.
Right.
I referred to this a moment ago, but one time you walked to your plane and it was loaded down, four inch pipe, about 20 foot, four inch pipe.
So that might have went over the weight limit a little.
I think most of the times we were over the weight limit.
But that was one time I remember because it
just floored me to see that thing half full of pipe like that.
But it flew.
Right.
You told me about some experiences that you had, that you had some pretty strange experiences leading up to going into the service and during the service.
Some of those that you recall that you were telling me about the other day.
Well,
I wanted to fly, and I was in the cotton field and seeing them airplanes coming on.
I said, there's a lot better.
I'd rather be doing that than picking this cotton.
Right.
And I had no idea.
I'd never have the chance, but I guess as time went on and the Air Corps lowered their requirements to where you could take a test and go in the aviation cadet program.
So I went to San Antonio and somehow passed the test.
Now, before all that, you were involved in a National Youth Association, a CCC.
We've talked about that on this show before, about a CCC.
Explain exactly what that is.
Well, this was not
Exactly, the CCC.
It's like a CCC.
Yeah, it was called the National Youth Association Administration, I guess.
And they had a, I went to Inks Lake and they had a camp there and they had
guy there who was rebuilding a Aronca and there was three or four of us that were interested in airplanes so we went and helped him and then we rebuilt that Aronca.
He did a lot of work except for us doing a lot of sanding and stuff.
But after Pearl Harbor they started closing down all these things and they sent me to
Carpus Christi.
At the Naval Air Station.
And I worked in the engine overhaul department down there until, I guess, 1942.
Right.
You were working on the F2Fs, the biplanes by Grumman, right?
Oh, yeah.
Oh, biplane Grumman, who had the right engines in them.
Sound like a bumblebee.
Looked like a bumblebee.
Right, right.
They made you all civil service, and you worked there until November of 42, and then you said you went to San Antonio and you took the test?
Yeah, I went and took the test before I quit, but then when I passed the test, I think I worked until about December before Christmas, and I decided to go home.
Right, this was aviation cadet training program, and they swore you in the same day.
You passed the test, and they swore you in.
Everything was being fast-tracked about now, right?
I couldn't believe it.
I guess they just looked at us, no physical, no nothing.
They just swore us in.
You were at Stillwater, Oklahoma.
You took some education classes there, right?
Yeah.
Took physics for the first time there, right?
Yeah, after basic training at Shepherd Field, they sent us up to Stillwater to what they call the college training detachment, and they taught us a lot of math.
and physics and, of course, still a lot of marching and stuff like that.
But that helped me a lot, I think, because I never had physics at Snook High School.
You went to pre-flight in San Antonio, then to bottom for primary in the PT-19.
That was the open cockpit plane.
Basic in Greenville and then the Twin Engine Advance at Ellington Field.
So, and they told you it'd be about six months, but ended up being pretty quick that, like we said, that you were off to California and to Stoneman, is that right?
Camp.
Yeah, Stoneman Camp and then to New Guinea and then you were there.
Yeah.
Let's look at some pictures that we've got here.
Some of these are some pictures that you supplied.
for us, and boy, there's a young flyer right there.
How old were you in that picture?
Oh, that was, I was 19, I guess, there.
Was that during training?
Yeah, that was primary training in Bonham, and we were up there probably in fall of 43, and yeah.
Now there you are, peering out of the pilot seat of a C-47.
I'm not sure exactly where that was taken, but that's a C-47.
C-47, I guess, for more modern day, would be what we see as like the Convair.
Is that right?
Sort of like the Convair airplane?
Convair is much more modern.
This was a DC-3 that the Air Force made over.
Right, DC-3.
Talk about this one.
That's me and my crew answering an alert in a B-47.
And you're the one that's climbing up the steps?
I'm climbing the ladder and the co-pilot's behind me and the navigators behind him.
Now was this an actual event here or was this staged for the magazine?
I don't know.
I think it was probably staged.
Okay, because the next picture that you're going to see is this same picture, and it was used actually on a telephone directory at MacDill, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, so that's why I think it was probably staged.
So people had your picture in their drawers and next to their telephones.
I'm sure we were on alert, but we probably did this with a camera one, because you can see an alert vehicle in the background there.
Yeah.
It looks like you're smiling going up the steps.
This is you and your wife, Barbara.
You lost your wife last year, Barbara.
But I know that you all were married for a long time.
Do you remember what this, I think she's receiving some sort of an award that you're presenting to her.
No, that's not me.
That's the base commander.
Oh, I'm sorry.
OK, OK.
That's your wife, commander.
That's your wife and the commander.
And she's receiving an award.
Yeah.
I don't remember what it was for.
I don't know whether it's said in the book or not.
What was she doing during the war?
During World War II?
Oh, she was a student working in Providence, Rhode Island.
Oh, is that right?
Yeah.
That's right.
Because you had not met her yet.
Is that right?
I mean, you had not met her while you were there during the war.
I didn't meet her until I was at Otis for 1952.
Right, right.
This is from a magazine.
Talk about this and why were you the flying crew of the month?
Well, this is my crew and we were on a B-52 evaluation flight.
We had four more evaluators with us when we had
a fire warning light in the number one engine, and it didn't go out, so we had to shut down the number two engine, and so then we had to burn off fuel and land.
We ended up shutting down four engines because the oil pressure just went to zero.
It's four out of six.
Four out of eight.
Four out of eight, excuse me.
You're on the far left of this picture.
Right.
Of course, you can't dump any fuel, and we're way too heavy to land, so we have to burn it up.
And with four engines shut down, it took us about five hours, I guess, to burn up fuel enough to be light enough to land without running off the other end of the runway.
Anyhow, everything ended up fine.
finally found out that it had a fuel leak in a number one nacelle and exploded and blew off about six by four foot piece of cowling underneath the thing.
But that's B-47.
That's quite a different airplane than the C-47.
It was a state of the art airplane, but very, very tricky to fly.
You had to pay attention to it all the time.
It was fast.
In fact, it could out run F-86 at altitude.
It's a magnificent looking plane.
This is another picture of my crew in a B-47.
Do you remember where that was taken?
I know it's been a long time.
That's at McDill.
Is it McDill?
You're on the left in that picture?
Right.
I was only in B-47s at McDill.
I see.
And when I left there, I went to B-52s.
That's going back.
That's pretty much right after you enlisted.
That's when I went into basic training, I think.
I'll tell you what, if Norman Rockwell could paint a picture of a young farm boy going into the service, he would paint that picture right there.
That looks like a farm kid from Snook being put in the uniform and ready to go.
Probably didn't know what was ahead of you.
Now we fast forward a few years to 1967.
Do you remember where this picture was taken and what your position was there?
I was probably... Where were you in November of 67?
67 I was at Griffiths Air Force Base in Rome, New York.
And I flew on a combat crew up until a few years, four months before I retired.
But I was...
Up in Griffish, I was put in the standardization section.
We gave checks to all the rest of the crews.
And then when I went to Seymour, I was the head of the standardization division at Seymour Johnson.
But I still flew on the crew and pulled alert like all the other crew members.
We just had a little more extra work to do.
Right.
You came home in December of 1945, which was your 22nd birthday is when you came home from the war.
1951, you found yourself in college at the University of Houston, and you got called up again.
Right.
Talk about that and sort of what it led to.
Well, I got called on February of 1951,
And I thought I was going to go to Korea.
But instead, I went to Lackland Air Force Base.
And they gave us a bunch of tests.
And they had a quota for a radar maintenance officer school.
And I guess because I was trying to major in math in University of Houston.
and you need math for electronics, they sent me on that quota to Keesler Air Force Base in Biloxi.
For 10 months, I studied electronics.
And from there, I went to Otis, to AC&W Squadron.
That's in Cape Cod, right?
Cape Cod.
And you met Barbara there.
That's where I met Barbara.
And we got married up there.
And had one boy born in Butters Bay, Massachusetts.
Right.
after this ACNW squadron was a National Guard call-up outfit and they deactivated them so they sent me to one of the big radar sets at Brunswick Naval Air Station which is up Brunswick, Maine and I was up there only a few months when they decided I ought to go overseas to Tripoli, Libya and
Barbara was seven months pregnant with the second child.
And so the idea was I was going to go over there and she was going to come later.
Well, I got over there and they said, no housing.
You have to live on the economy over there.
And I didn't think she'd like to do that.
So they said, you can go out to this remote site.
and the year tour or so.
For a one year tour?
One year tour.
So you opted for that?
So I opted for that out in the desert at an early warning radar site.
Sounds like that was a very lonely job.
Yeah, we only had one guy that went nuts.
Yeah.
But anyhow.
What did you do?
I know you tracked flights coming out of Egypt and other areas in Europe, is that right?
It was an early warning radar site which boldly tracks airplanes
before they get to Wheelus.
That's about 200 miles, 250 miles east of Wheelus.
And we had a big radar site.
We had our own power unit.
We had just like a little base.
I was out there and I had about seven additional duties.
I ended up being that detachment commander
before I left out there in one year.
You said your second son was born and he was a year old before you got to see him, right?
Yeah, that's right.
I came back, that's when they decided I was going to be an aircraft commander in the B-47.
Like you said, my second son was a year old when I saw him.
Right.
The difference between the C-47 and the B-47.
Well, the cruising speed of a C-47 was about the landing speed of a B-47.
Things happen a lot faster.
Yeah, 450 knots on a B-47.
Right.
You said that one of the hardest things you ever had to do was the refueling process.
And keep that thing steady.
Talk about what was involved with that in-air refueling process.
Well, probably harder for
Somebody like me, we'd never flown a lot of formation or anything, and we got within a half a mile of another airplane, and we thought we were as close.
And then when you had to go right up underneath that thing, it's a ticklish situation, very much.
Like I say, I've never concentrated on anything so hard.
And most people I know of were wringing wet sweat when they got through.
Especially refueling the B-47 on an old KC-97 that couldn't go but 200 knots.
And we were about to stall out back there behind them.
And of course it was a blessing when we finally got some KC-97s.
And of course we were fueled down to 15,000 feet in the KC-97 where all the weather was usually up to.
And you're going through clouds.
It's the toughest thing I ever tried to do in my life.
You were on duty during the Cuban crisis, during the Cold War and during the Cuban crisis.
You were at MacDill during the Cuban crisis, is that right?
Right.
But the night that President Kennedy made the speech, the nose-to-nose speech to Khrushchev, where were you that night?
I was on a C-97 going to Hunter.
They had moved the whole wing out of MacDill in about two days up to Savannah.
Right.
And the fighters and reconnaissance airplanes took over McDill.
And I was on that airplane when I heard him making a speech.
Of course, we had known what was going on, I guess, and not many people did.
Exactly, exactly.
And it could have led to a lot more, obviously.
And when the Cuban crisis was over,
I got orders to go to B22.
Right, right.
This is an item that was given to you.
I don't know how close we can get on that.
We'll go right there.
This is, I guess, a jewelry box, is that right?
I don't know what it is.
It's a cigarette box, cigar box, a jewelry box, or whatever.
There we go.
And it was given to you, I'll read the inscription on the back, presented by General Kim Sung-yong, Chief of Staff of the Republic of Korea Air Force.
1969, about.
And I think...
They wanted to fly on a beauty too, I guess.
There were three of them, him and two other generals with him.
And they were
I said most excited about air refueling.
I bet.
Yeah.
So, and he got a box out of the deal.
That's great.
He gave everybody on the crew a little gift, and they were not all the same.
That's right.
I know that that's quite a keepsake.
You retired in July of 1970, and you worked 13 years at Twin City Mission.
And I'd like to talk more about that, but we're just about out of time.
But thank you very much for your service, and thank you for being here today.
Thank you.
LeRoy Schoenemann is one of the many who sacrificed his most vital years to serve in World War II.
In retirement in Bryan, he can be found tending to his land near Schnuck or enjoying his and Barbara's seven grandchildren.
It's a retirement that is certainly well-earned.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Please join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.